---
title: 'Blog Post number 4'
date: 2015-08-14
permalink: /posts/2012/08/blog-post-4/
tags:
  - cool posts
  - category1
  - category2
---

This is a sample blog post. Lorem ipsum I can't remember the rest of lorem ipsum and don't have an internet connection right now. Testing testing testing this blog post. Blog posts are cool.

Reading List
======
Philips Guo
- [Three quick tips for faculty job applications](https://pg.ucsd.edu/faculty-job-application-tips.htm)
- [Philip’s notes on the tenure-track assistant professor job search](./files/guo-faculty-job-search.pdf), [original link](https://pg.ucsd.edu/guo-faculty-job-search.pdf)

Notes
======
- [Advice for Researchers and Students, by Tao Xie, a very long list](http://taoxie.cs.illinois.edu/advice/)

Faculty Job Seach
------
- Apply broadly to a wide range of universities, Twenty to forty schools is reasonable
- Contact professors wherever you are applying if you or your mentors know any faculty there. I had personal contacts at 8 of the 10 schools where I got interviews; either I knew someone there, or one of my mentors knew someone and put in a good word for me. Don't feel bashful about emailing relevant faculty, even if you aren't particularly close to them; they want to hire good people who do work that interests them. As long as you send a concise and well-written email, people won't dismiss you as a spammer. 


Research Statement
------
- Make the first paragraph of your research statement outstanding


Teaching Statement
------

Other Statement
------

About Assistant Professor and Tenure
------
- Without amazing time management skills, you can't even begin to carve out the focused attention and energy needed to make the sorts of creative research innovations that will build your early faculty career.
- [Comparing academic departments when deciding between faculty job offers](https://pg.ucsd.edu/comparing-academic-departments-for-faculty-jobs.htm)
